# One Fell Sweep

In this chapter, you will build an allocator function called `tgc_alloc()`. It
has the same interface as the standard library's `malloc()`, except you don't
need to call `free()` on the memory you allocate with it!

However, it has a
very bad garbage collection algorithm. The only time it frees up memory is when
you call `tgc_stop()` at the end of your program. This function frees *all* the
allocated memory at once. To make that possible, the allocator function stores
each allocated pointer in an array, and `tgc_stop()` calls `free()` on each
pointer in the array.

At this point, it's not much better than no garbage collection at all. But it
lays the foundation for building a proper garbage collector in the rest of the
booklet.

## The allocator

### 1

Create a new header file named `tgc.h`. Add a function prototype for
`tgc_alloc()`.

{{alloc-prototype}}

It takes the number of bytes to allocate and returns a pointer to the allocated
memory, just like `malloc()` from the standard library.

### 2

Include `<stdlib.h>` to get the `size_t` type.

{{include-stdlib}}

### 3

Lastly, before we move on to the actual `tgc.c` file, let's wrap the header
file in an [#include guard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Include_guard) so
that users of our library don't get "that's already been defined" errors from
including our header file multiple times.

{{ifndef-define}}

### 4

Now for the implementation of `tgc_alloc()`. Create a new file called `tgc.c`
for this.

{{alloc}}

For now it acts the same as `malloc()`.

### 5

Let's make sure to include our header file before we go on.

{{include-tgc}}

One more bit of housekeeping. `tgc.c` is going to end up growing very large.
To help find our way around it, we're going to add special comments that denote
different sections in the file. `tgc_alloc()` will go under the "allocator
functions" section.

{{allocator-functions-section}}

## Pointer table

We need to keep track of each block of memory we allocate, so that we can
collect it (free it) later. Let's create a struct that holds all the
information we need about each block of allocated memory. For now, all we'll
store is the pointer to the memory that we got from `malloc()`.

{{tgc-ptr-struct}}

Let's create an array to hold the metadata for each block of allocated memory.
In other words, an array of `tgc_ptr_t` structs. We'll make it a dynamically
allocated array, and keep it in a struct that will contain all the global state
of our garbage collector.

{{tgc-struct}}

`nitems` is the number of slots in the array filled with `tgc_ptr_t` values,
and `nslots` is the total number of slots available in the array. When `nitems`
is equal to `nslots`, the array is full and we'll have to grow the array.

To initialize our global state struct, we'll have the user of our library call
a function called `tgc_start()` at the beginning of their program. Here is the
prototype.

{{start-prototype}}

And here is the implementation. Put it in a new "gc control" (garbage
collection control) section.

{{start}}

It initializes `items` to be an empty array with no space allocated.

We're going to want to add each pointer we allocate to this array. To be able
to do that, `tgc_alloc()` needs to take the global state struct as an argument.
In fact, every public function of our library will have `tgc_t *gc` as its
first argument.

Let's add it to the function prototype first.

{{alloc-gc-prototype}}

Now add it to the function definition.

{{alloc-gc}}

Alright, now let's work on adding each pointer we allocate to the `gc->items`
array. Start by calling a nonexistent `tgc_add()` function.

{{call-add}}

We'll implement `tgc_add()` by calling two more nonexistent functions:
`tgc_resize()` will ensure there is enough room in the array to add one more
pointer, and `tgc_add_ptr()` will actually add it to the array.

{{add}}

Write a simple `tgc_resize()` function in a new "resize pointer table" section.
If the array is full, it will grow the array by doubling its size.

{{resize}}

`calloc()` sets all the bytes we're allocating to 0. This sets all our pointers
to `NULL`, which for us is a special value that means that slot in the array is
considered empty.

Let's copy the contents of the old array into the beginning of the new array
we've allocated. This is safe because the array currently only ever grows, and
never shrinks.

{{resize-memcpy}}

We need to include `<string.h>` to get `memcpy()`.

{{include-string}}

Don't forget to free the old array!

{{resize-free}}

OK, that's it for `tgc_resize()`. Now we can implement the other nonexistent
function we used earlier, `tgc_add_ptr()`. Thanks to `tgc_add()`, we can assume
there is at least one empty slot in the array, so all we have to do is loop
through the array, find that empty slot, and fill it with the pointer. This
goes into a new "pointer table operations" section.

{{add-ptr}}

((Do we really need to do this check now? When would a pointer ever be
double-added anyway? This won't work between the point where we start removing
pointers from the array and the point where we actually start using it a hash
table.))

{{add-ptr-check-already-exists}}

## Error handling

OK. Everything's now in place to keep track of pointers. Let's go back and do
some error handling.

If `malloc()` returns `NULL`, that means it failed due to being out of memory.
In that case, we'll skip calling `tgc_add()` and just return the `NULL`
pointer.

{{alloc-handle-null}}

We also need to handle an out-of-memory `NULL` return value from `calloc()` in
our `tgc_resize()` function. If it won't let us grow the array, we'll keep the
old array and return `0` (false) to indicate that the resize failed and that
the array might not have any empty spaces. We'll return `1` (true) on success.
The return type of `tgc_resize()` will have to be changed from `void` to `int`.

{{resize-handle-null}}

Now we have to handle the `0` return value from `tgc_resize()` in `tgc_add()`.
If `tgc_resize()` failed, then calling `tgc_add_ptr()` is unsafe because the
array might be full. So in that case, we'll just free the allocated block of
memory and return `NULL` to tell the allocation function that the allocation
should has failed.

{{add-handle-resize-failure}}

In `tgc_alloc()`, return the value that `tgc_add()` returns, so that if it
failed adding the pointer to the array (in which case it also freed the
pointer), we'll return `NULL` from `tgc_alloc()`. Otherwise, the allocated
pointer will be returned, as before.

{{alloc-handle-add-failure}}

## Sweep

It's time to start implementing the sweep phase of our mark and sweep garbage
collector. For now, `tgc_sweep()` will simply free every pointer in the pointer
table, removing each one from the table as it goes. Put this in a new section
called "mark and sweep".

{{sweep}}

If the `ptr` field is `NULL`, that means the slot is empty so we skip it.
`memset`ting the struct to `0`'s has the effect of setting `ptr` to `NULL`,
marking the slot as empty.

Let's skip the sweep phase altogether when there are no allocations. Garbage
collection is expensive, so we should take any chance we get to skip an entire
phase like this.

{{sweep-return-early}}

Let's create a `tgc_stop()` function to go with `tgc_start()`. The user is
expected to call `tgc_stop()` at the end of their program, or when they are
done using garbage collection. It should run the sweep phase to free all
allocated memory, and also free the memory used by the garbage collector's
internal structures (i.e. the pointer table).

Here is the `tgc_stop()` function prototype.

{{stop-prototype}}

Here is the `tgc_stop()` implementation.

{{stop}}

In the [next chapter](03.mark.html), we will implement the mark phase of our
mark and sweep garbage collector.

